# T9

Map strings of digits to potential alphanumeric character strings
using the T9 telephone keypad.

This is a favorite interview question of mine.
It is trickier than it looks for most people
resulting in frustration and retries
which are often entertaining to watch
and reveal a lot about a candidate.

Since this isn't a _well-known_ interview question AFAIK,
any candidate who solves it right off the bat is probably a good hire
from a programming standpoint.

> Apologies to those who consider whiteboard questions in interviews problematic.
For me it's always been the _most important part_ but YMMV.

## Exercise Description

The exercise, described in
[`EXERCISE.md`](https://github.com/madkins23/T9/blob/master/EXERCISE.md),
is to map a string of digits to a set of alphanumeric strings
using the T9 telephone keypad.

> This might be useful in trying to memorize a new telephone number.

Solutions to this exercise can be found on github:

    https://github.com/madkins23/T9

> There is an "extra credit" at the bottom of the exercise.
I've never even attempted that filter, but it's there in case
an applicant nails the core problem in no time at all.

## Multiple Languages

I am structuring this project to allow multiple solutions in different
programming languages in the fullness of time.
For the moment these include:

* Common Lisp
* Go
* Java
* Perl

> Can your favorite programming language do better?

## Multiple Solutions

There are, as one would expect, multiple solutions to this problem.
A common initial reaction is to use some set of loops to walk over
the potential solutions, but that won't generally work.

### Recursive

The recursive solution is most common, and arguably the simplest.
Other solutions represent an unrolling of the recursion,
or rather a more formal representation of the state that
is kept in the execution stack in the recursive solution.

> The first thing I'm looking for is that the candidate recognizes
that the problem requires a recursive solution.

The key to the recursive solution is that _two_ things need to be
passed down the recursive routine stack:

* the current partially built result string and
* the remainder of the original digit string.

The top-level call provides an empty string for the first and the
candidate digit string for conversion in the second.

> If a candidate does not find this solution they're usually lost.

### Odometer

The odometer solution provides a data structure for each digit
in the candidate string (and solution string).
Each data structure is like a wheel in mechanical odometer:

* it has a set of legal states,
* it has a _current_ state, and
* rolling a wheel over the top carries over to the wheel to the left.

Once the data structure is created, two nested loops handle
the generation of the result strings from the data structure.
At any point in time a result can be directly generated form
the data structure, after which the counter is tripped.
The inner loop processes the wheels from right to left to
generate the next result in the odometer state.

> No one ever thinks of this, perhaps mechanical odometers are gone now?

### Numeric

The numeric solution changes generation of solution strings into
a counting problem with a weirdly-based numeric system.
It is similar to the odometer solution but does not store state data.
The state data is directly inferred from a series of integers.

Like the odometer solution there is a preparatory step.
In this case an array of lookup tables is made, one for each digit,
containing the set of possible characters for that digit.
Unlike the odometer solution the current state of each digit is not necessary.
During this step the number of solutions is generated by multiplying the
number of states for each digit together.

The main processing is simply counting from zero to the number of solutions.
At each stage this number directly represents a solution string.

To convert the number to a solution string begin with the number of characters
associated with the rightmost digit.
The remainder of the counting number divided by the number of characters
(or states) for that digit is used to lookup one of the digits.
Then the counting number is divided by that number of states and the remaindered thrown away.

For each digit right to left this remainder/division process is continued.
At each stage a character is looked up from the appropriate lookup map.

> One candidate bumped up against this solution during an interview.
He didn't pursue it but eventually made a recursive solution work.
I would have been more impressed if he had made this work.

## Test Data

There is test data in the `test` directory:

* `digits` small set of small digit strings used for testing
* `results` output from running Perl filter on `digits`

## Installation and Usage

Acquire the code for this project in some normal fashion left as an exercise
for the reader.

Installation and usage instructions for individual solutions are packaged in `README.md` files
for each individual language.
